---
layout: post
title: The Transformer Architecture
date: 2023-11-25 00:00:00
tags: transformer architecture
categories: [blog]
comments: true
disqus_identifier: 20231125
preview_pic: /assets/images/2023-01-19-SPARQL_WikiData.png
---


"For the past several years, Transformers have revolutionized not just NLP, but image, video, and audio processing. At the time of this recording, new Transformer models are seemingly coming out every month, which are smashing benchmarks in all types of tasks. And in this module, we're going to get to know Transformers really well. We'll learn how they work in detail and build one from scratch. We'll then learn how we can leverage pretrained Transformers for our own projects. We're going to build on everything we've learned so far in part two to really understand and use Transformers. Transformers are a type of neural network architecture, so everything we learned about neural networks will apply. Here. We'll take the concept of Learnable Embeddings, which we first encountered in Word Vectors. We'll leverage what we learned about generating language and building language models, and also the concepts of encoders, decoders, and attention. Let's dive right in. We're going to learn about the original Transformer first introduced by the Google Brain Team. All the other Transformer models which came afterwards are variations of this original architecture, and you'll have no problem understanding them after going through this. The Transformer is primarily built from two types of blocks encoder blocks and decoder blocks. We'll focus on the Encoder side first, and we'll start by going all the way back to tokenization. So the first thing we'll talk about is the input tokens we'll feed to the Encoder. Imagine we want to tokenize a sentence such as where can I find a pizzeria? Up to this point, we've looked at two tokenization approaches word level tokenization, which we used throughout the course, including the last module on Seek to Seek, where we built a translation model, and character level tokenization, which we used in the RNN module to build a standalone language model. And each approach has its trade offs. Word level tokenization is conceptually straightforward and intuitive. For English, it's mostly white space separation, but there are multiple downsides. One is that it doesn't handle out of vocabulary words, including slang and misspellings. Language is constantly changing, and to keep up with it, we'd have to keep retraining our tokenizer. Another is that for large corpora, we're going to have an outsized vocabulary, especially with some highly expressive languages. And handling punctuation can be a challenge with character level tokenization. Our tokens would be the collection of characters for a language like English that results in a tiny vocabulary, making it much more memory efficient. And because after going through a corpus we'll probably have all the English characters, handling new words won't be a problem. On the downside, it burdens the model with learning a sequence of characters first before learning higher level aspects of its meaning, and that can lead to loss in performance with regards to inference. With the Transformer, a middle ground tokenization approach was used called subword tokenization. The idea is this keep the frequent words as is, but break the rarer words into commonly occurring subwords. So words like he, she, up and down would remain as whole words, while rarer words would be broken down into frequently occurring subwords. And this is done through a statistical algorithm which we'll cover. So, going back to our example, let's say we want to tokenize our sentence with subword tokenization, running it through a subword tokenizer. It's reasonable to expect the first five words to remain whole since they're common. But maybe the word pizzeria is rare and gets broken down into frequently occurring subwords such as pi, double, z, and area. These subwords become part of the tokenizer's vocabulary. The word pizzeria does not. But because we have all the subwords, the word pizzeria can be recreated. Why is this useful? Well, let's say at inference time, our tokenizer comes across a word it hasn't seen before, in this case, Listeria, which I think is a pretty rare word in the general corpus. If we trained our subword tokenizer on a regular corpus that included our sentence, the word list would almost certainly be in our vocabulary, since it's such a common word. And the subword area would also be in the tokenizer's vocabulary. In this case, rather than failing, listeria would get tokenized into two tokens list and area. So subword tokenization is a great middle ground between word level tokenization and character level tokenization. It has a better chance of handling out of vocabulary words while still keeping a smaller vocabulary size. And since the model isn't being asked to learn sequences of characters for every word, it can focus on learning the higher level aspects of meaning, leading to better performance. And there is meaning in subwords. Take these examples disown, disengage, Disconnect and disarm. In all of these, the word dis meaning apart has the same role, and the model can learn that meaning separate from the word it's attached to. Let's look at how to actually perform subword tokenization. There are multiple ways to do this, but the most popular way is byte pair encoding, or BPE. BPE isn't specific to NLP and is actually a simple data compression algorithm. The idea is to build tokens based on pattern frequency. Say we want to build a vocabulary from this sentence. She sells seashells by the seashore. This is our entire corpus. We'll start off by separating the words on spaces, the dash at the end of each word here is an end of Word Symbol. From these words we create an initial vocabulary which is just all the characters in the corpus, including the end of Word symbol. So this is our vocabulary for now. From there, we want to look for the most frequently adjacent words from our vocabulary. So among our current vocabulary members, which two occur next to each other most frequently? And there are multiple options here. S and H occur next to each other three times. So do H and E as well as E and the end of word symbol. And let's say we go with the first one we found, which is S and H. What we do is merge the two letters and add the result to our vocabulary and that becomes our updated vocabulary. We now have a new subword. From there, we repeat the process using the updated vocabulary. And let's say this time H and E are merged and added. So now we have a word that stands on its own and can also serve as a subword for rare words such as helios. And we just keep doing it again and again and again. And now we have another commonly occurring word in our vocabulary, she. And this repeats until we've performed N merges, where N is something we can control and at the end of it we will have a vocabulary of commonly occurring words and subwords, which can be composed into rarer words. Okay, so that's subword tokenization with byte pair encoding byte pair encoding was used by the original transformer. But there are other subword tokenization algorithms. There's Word Piece, which is closed source and used by a transformer model called Burt, which we'll look at, and an open source alternative called Sentence Piece. I've included links to learn more about them, but the core principles are the same. Okay, so going back to our encoder, a Subware tokenizer is run over our corpus to create the input tokens. These input tokens are mapped to embeddings which we've used for the past several modules. Nothing different here. In the case of the original transformer, each token is mapped to a 512 dimension embedding and those embeddings are fed to the encoder block. Okay, so that's the input. Now we're going to look at the inner workings of the encoder block. Let's first revisit recurrence based attention and look at its shortcomings. As we know with recurrence, if we want to know the state at any given time step, all the previous time steps have to be computed first. In this example, we can learn about the state at timestep four only after time steps one, two and three have been computed. This is the first major problem with RNNs. They can't be parallelized and that presents a bottleneck when training them on huge data sets. The second major issue is that the last hidden state which represents the sequence, has to capture a lot of long distance relationships. For example, the word pizzeria has multiple associations with the rest of the sentence. What about a pizzeria? Well, it's attached to the word find and those two words are associated with where signaling this is a question. With a short sentence like this, maybe capturing all this information isn't a problem, but with a paragraph this could lead to information loss, which is the second major problem. Now, attention somewhat mitigates this, but the problem still remains on the encoder side. So how can these problems be overcome? 



One of the big ideas of the transformer is that instead of having each encoder output be a sequential processing of the previous time steps up to that point, throw away recurrence and base each encoder output on all the encoder inputs. So instead of recurrence, there's going to be some alternative mechanism. And the encoder output corresponding to the first input is going to be based on all the encoder inputs. So not just on the first, but all of them. Same thing for the fifth output, for example. That's also going to be generated by taking all the encoder inputs into account, not just the ones leading up to that point. And that's going to be done by having the encoder perform attention on itself through a process called self attention. Let's see how it works. We'll start by looking at a simple version of self attention and keep building on it until we arrive at what the transformer does. Okay, let's say this is our input sequence. It's a sequence of length three, where each embedding is of dimension four. We want to generate the first encoder output. It starts by taking x one and dotting it with itself. Then we take x one and dot it with the next embedding, x two. If you followed the last module where we first encountered attention, this should look like basic dot product attention. Finally, we dot x one with x three. That's going to yield three scalars, which are our attention scores. These scores go through a softmax to create attention weights, and those attention weights are used to create a weighted sum of the embeddings. So the first weight times x one plus the second weight times x two plus the third weight times x three. And the result of that is our first encoder output. All right, so very similar to what we learned in the last module, where the attention mechanism blends multiple vectors together based on a set of weights. When we generate the second encoder output, it's the exact same thing, except x two is now multiplied by every other embedding, and that leads to the second encoder output. Now, because every output is based on all inputs, there's no need to do any sequential processing. We can actually calculate all outputs in a single pass using matrices. Okay, so here we have our inputs in matrix form. We'll dot that with a transpose of the inputs. That's going to give us a matrix of attention scores. We'll then apply softmax to each row, which is going to give us a matrix of attention weights. Those attention weights are dotted with the inputs, and that is going to give us all our encoder outputs. Each encoder output now incorporates information from all inputs, and that was done in a single pass. And because the outputs of a self attention layer are of the same dimension as the inputs, we can easily stack attention layers. So here we have the outputs of a simple selfattention layer, and those outputs can be fed into another attention layer. Now there's a major shortcoming with simple self attention there are no learnable weights anywhere here beyond the embedding layer. The point of attention is to learn how one embedding should relate to another. But if there are no weights here to train, then we'll be relying only on the embedding layer to do all the work. Which isn't enough. Let's recap the end of the last module where we talked about attention as information retrieval. So here we have a recurrent based encoder and decoder. The encoder has processed the input sequence and the decoder is getting started. The encoder hidden states can be viewed as an information store which the decoder can access to do a better job. The current decoder state serves as a query to this information store. The encoder hidden states serve as keys and values, much like a Python dictionary. The attention mechanism compares the decoder query against every encoder key and that results in a single vector which incorporates all the encoder hidden states. As we covered in the last module, what we're getting is a blend of encoder hidden states using the same line of thinking that leads us to scaled product selfattention. Rather than multiplying the raw embeddings with each other, we first turn them into queries keys and values. So here we're multiplying x one by a matrix WQ to generate a query vector. X one is then multiplied by another matrix Wk to create a key vector. And finally also another matrix WV to create a value vector. Okay, so x one has now been projected into separate query key and value vectors and we use the same three matrices to do the same for x two and x three. I just colored the queries keys and values separately to better tell them apart. From there, we carry on like we did before. The first query is multiplied by every key and the result of that is used to create attention weights. And once again, that's taking the resulting attention scores and putting that through a soft max. Now, there is one more big difference here. The attention scores are scaled by the root of the key size. And the reason for this is that as the dimensions get larger, so do the scores. And as we've seen, when we put large scores through a softmax, we get tiny outputs for the smaller values, which can lead to vanishing gradients. So by scaling it, we can keep that in check. Okay, so the inputs to the softmax are scaled attention scores and from there we take the attention weights and perform a weighted sum of all the value vectors to create the output. And the same thing is done for the next encoder input using the second query. Now, just like simple self attention, there's no need to do any of this sequentially. We can use matrices to do all this in a single pass, starting off with the inputs, which is a matrix of T by D that's multiplied by a query matrix, key matrix and value matrix each of dimension D by D. So in our example, four by four, that's going to generate corresponding queries keys and values. Next, the keys are transposed and every query is multiplied with every key. That's going to create a matrix of T by T attention scores, which we scale. So these attention scores dictate how much each embedding relates to another that's put through a soft max that's applied rowwise to create attention weights, also T by T. And finally, those attention weights are multiplied with the values to create our encoder outputs. And we can actually more succinctly express it like this. Once the input is projected into queries keys and values, these can go into an attention formula to create the output. Okay, so this mechanism where inputs go in, get projected into queries keys and values and go through the attention calculation, can be viewed as an attention head, a single head in this case. Now consider this sentence sarah went to a restaurant to meet her friend that night. This is a mundane everyday sentence, but there's a lot of information here. Let's say the first word is a current query self. Attention is trying to learn how this word relates to the other words. And the word Sarah in this case relates to the other words in different ways, right? For example, what did Sarah do? She went somewhere to meet someone. Where did Sarah go? A restaurant. Who did Sarah meet? Her friend. When did she go? That night. The point here is that self attention as we know it focuses on only one aspect of the sentence. One embedding is going to get the most weight. But all these aspects are important in their own way. So we need a way for selfattention to learn multiple relationships at once. This is where multi head selfattention comes in. Let's say our input is again a sequence of length three, but this time each embedding is of dimension twelve. Multi head selfattention is exactly what it sounds like. Instead of having a single selfattention head, we'll have multiple heads, in this case, three. Each head is going to have its own set of query key and value matrices. Crucially, the dimension of each matrix isn't going to be D by D, but D by D over H, where H is the number of attention heads. And I apologize that the illustration is still square there. So in our example, since our embedding dimension is twelve and we have three heads, each weight matrix is going to be twelve by four. And each head will have its own set of twelve x four key query value matrices. From there, internally in each head, the mechanism remains the same. The query key values are calculated. Since the weight matrices are twelve by four, the vectors are in a lower dimension. Those go through their own scaled dot product selfattention calculation. And each head generates its own three by four output. To get our final output those are concatenated and run through a D by D linear layer for further processing. So by using multiple heads, we've now enabled the network to learn different relationships between the words. And one cool thing is that because each head is operating in a smaller dimension of D over h, the overall computation across multiple heads isn't higher than single head attention. So we're able to learn different relationships without paying the performance penalty. Each attention head can also run in parallel. One thing to note here is that in this illustration, we're maintaining separate matrices for each head because it's easier to visualize and understand that way. But in practice, we don't need to do this, as we'll see in the demo. So going back to our encoder, the first layer in the encoder block is a multi head selfattention layer. And that's going to learn how to relate each encoder input to the other inputs. Now, before we go further, a few details about the original transformer. The original transformer has an Embedding dimension of 512. This is also known as the model dimension, because this is maintained throughout. There are eight attention heads. So the dimension of each head is 512 divided by eight, which is 64. All right, so we've replaced Recurrence with multi head self attention. What have we gained? Operations can now be run in parallel. Each head can run in parallel. And unlike Recurrence, where we had to process each time step sequentially, all the encoder outputs can be generated together. Learning a long distance relationship is now an one operation. With Recurrence, a word relating to another word was an on operation. So multihead selfattention overcomes two of the major challenges of Recurrence. But there's something we lost in our move to selfattention. Word order was lost with Recurrence. The fact that we were processing the sequence in order automatically gave some sequential context to the output. With Selfattention, however, there is no position information. In that sense, selfattention is an operation on sets rather than sequences. If we were to change the order of the inputs, we would still get the same corresponding outputs, which is undesirable because we know that word order matters. So when word order changes, we want the Embeddings to reflect that. So what we need to do is inject position information back into the model. The original transformer used sinusoids. So it had these curves in the form of sine waves. And there was one sinusoid per dimension. Here our Embeddings are of dimension four. So we have four sinusoids. The idea is pretty intuitive. The xaxis denotes the sequence position. So for every Embedding, we take the corresponding value of every sinusoid at that sequence position. So here we're taking four points from the four sinusoids for position zero. Those sinusoidal values are then used as a position vector, which we add to the input Embedding. And we do the same thing with the rest of the inputs. And this way our Embeddings are now differentiated by position. And if you're curious, these two formulas here describe how to sample these curves. So there are actually two types of curves being used here. One for even dimensions and another for odd. Each formula takes a position parameter, a variable I representing which dimension we're interested in, and the model dimension also plays a role as well. And this is how we'd get the position vector for an embedding. There are a few interesting properties here, and I've included a link to read more about them. But nowadays it's more common to represent the position as a learnable position embedding. The mechanism is identical to word embeddings. So the model would learn how best to represent a position using backpropagation. And that's what we'll use in this module. Okay, so going back to our encoder, we'll add positional embeddings to our input embeddings before passing it to the encoder block. And the positional embeddings will be of the same dimension as our input embeddings. All right, cool. 


Non-linearity

So where are we? We added a bunch of learnable weights, but there's still no nonlinearity in our system. It's all just linear combinations where we keep re averaging vectors. And as we know now, we need to include some nonlinearity to learn complex relationships. So let's do that. Suppose this is the output from the multi head selfattention layer. What we'll do next is put that through a plain feedforward neural network. The original transformer used a two layer network with ReLU activation in the hidden layer, which supplies our nonlinearity. The dimensions of the neural network in the original transformer were as follows. There were 512 inputs in the input layer because that was the embedding size. That expanded to a hidden layer four times wider with 2048 units with a ReLU activation. The output layer then brought it back down to 512 units to maintain the same model dimension. Now, here's the critical thing. In the previous modules, when we had to run word embeddings through a feedforward neural network, we either combined them into one embedding or we used recurrence. Neither of those are done here. Instead, the network is applied pointwise. All that means is that each embedding is passed on its own through the network. So the first embedding will go through, then the second, and finally the third. In practice, it doesn't have to be sequential. It can be done in parallel. 


All right, so going back to our encoder block, we'll add a feed forward neural network that's applied pointwise to the outputs of the multi head self attention layer. The feedforward neural network will produce the output embeddings, which will have the same dimension as the input embeddings in the original transformer. Six of these encoder blocks were stacked to produce the encoder outputs. Just a side note here, I'm using the term block. In other references, you may see the block referred to as a layer, and the contents of that layer referred to as sublayers. Okay, so the output of one block served as input to the next block, which is why maintaining the same model dimension throughout was really convenient. Having this deep setup also enabled the transformer to learn greater representations of the input. But this came at a cost. First of all, the depth of the network and the nonlinearities led to shifting inputs and noise as the signal traveled through the network. Second, the depth led to important information, such as positional information being diluted as well as vanishing gradients because of the repeated applications of the nonlinearities. So to counter this, the original transformer used two techniques. Let's address the first issue. So you may remember Batch Normalization from neural networks too. If you don't, that's okay. The important thing is that Batch Normalization was used to normalize the outputs of a node such that they had a zero mean and a variance of one. And this could lead to better training results because it smoothened the lost landscape. It was called Batch Normalization because it was calculated across a batch. So here we have a batch of outputs from a layer. So the first column there is the output for one sample. With Batch Normalization, we calculated the mean and standard deviation across the batch. But there are a few things here which make it unsuitable for our purposes. Batch Normalization isn't suitable for variable length sequences. The calculations are dependent on the batch size itself, and it can't be parallelized, since we need to wait for the entire batch to accumulate before we can calculate the mean and standard deviation. So instead, the original transformer uses Layer Normalization. The idea is similar, but instead of calculating across the batch, the mean and standard deviation is calculated across the layer output. So the mean is the average of all the layer output values. The standard deviation is based on the layer output values as well. Each layer output is then normalized by subtracting it from the mean and dividing it by the standard deviation. And like Batch Normalization, there are two learnable parameters, gamma and beta, to scale and shift the values as the network sees fit. So by going with Layer Normalization, the model can still achieve greater training stability, but breaks away from batch dependency. Going back to our two issues, the first one is addressed with Layer Normalization. The second issue is addressed using skip or residual connections, which comes to us from the image processing world. Here we have three layers of a neural network. We can call the output from layer I x, and we can call the output from layer J j of x, which is the output of layer I. Run through layer J, a skip connection simply takes the output of layer I and adds it to the output of layer J. That's it. So what's going into layer K is a sum of two outputs the output of layer I and the output of layer J. And it turns out this works really well. During forward prop, it reduces the chances of losing signal from earlier layers because they're being added to subsequent output. And during backprop, it reduces the chances of vanishing gradients because a signal can still move back over the skip connections, whereas without one we might lose signal from the ReLU derivative. So those are skip connections. And that's the solution for losing earlier information and potential vanishing gradients. So going back to our original single encoder block, the original transformer used a skip connection to pass its input forward and add that to the output of the multihead selfattention layer, and it then passed that through layer normalization. It then did the same thing again by passing the result through a skip connection and adding it to the output to the feedforward neural network before running it through layer norm. Just a side note, this was the layer normalization arrangement used in the original transformer. But in a lot of literature afterwards, the layer norm was placed before the self attention and feed forward layers. So here the input goes through layer norm, then multi head selfattention, and then a skip connection comes by itself afterward and it was found to lead to better training stability. The original transformer used a learning rate Warmup, where it started off with a slow learning rate, gradually ramped it up before toning it back down again, similar to the one cycle learning schedule we saw in Neural Networks two with prelayer normalization, as shown here. That isn't necessary. I've included a paper to learn more about this if you're interested. But for now, we'll stick with the original transformer. So after going through six encoder blocks, we'll get output embeddings. And the cool thing is that they'll be contextualized. So given a word, the same word is going to have a different output embedding depending on its surrounding words. So the embedding for the word rock is going to be different if it's occurring in rock concert versus rock climbing. Okay, so that's the entirety of the encoder. 




# decoder

Let's shift our attention to the decoder. Now, fortunately, almost all the ideas are the same. Let's say we're training a transformer to translate English to Hungarian. Once again, we'll have subword tokens of our decoder inputs for teacher forcing. Those are going to be represented by word embeddings. We'll use positional embeddings to add positional information to the target inputs, and that's going to go into the first decoder block, which has its own multi head selfattention layer. But there's a key difference here. With the encoder, it's okay for each output to be based on the entire sequence. After all, we have access to the entire input ahead of time. Let's compare that to the decoder. The decoder's job is to take the target inputs for teacher forcing and use them to train the decoder to output the correct sequence. So given an input, the decoder has to predict the next token. But with the way multihead selfattention works right. Now the decoder is able to look ahead at the rest of the decoder inputs. Basically, it can cheat and simply return the future inputs as its predictions and won't learn anything. So what we need to do is block the decoder from accessing future parts of the sequence for a given position. The decoder should be able to access inputs only up to and including its current position. And we can do that by using masked multi head selfattention. Imagine this t by t block of squares as our attention scores, where the darker the square, the higher the score. Okay, so the first row represents how strongly the first token relates to itself and the rest of the tokens. Let's put that to the side for now. What we'll use is an attention mask, which is a matrix of the same dimension as our attention scores. The lower diagonal is set to one and the upper half is set to zero. Wherever in the mask is set to one, we'll keep the corresponding attention score as is everywhere else, the score is changed to negative infinity. Okay, so the resulting mass detention scores would look like this with the lower diagonal remaining the same and the upper diagonal set to negative infinity. This will then go through a soft max as usual. And what we get are attention weights that look like this, where the negative infinity scores have a weight of zero. So the multihead self attention layer is going to have a masking element. The outputs are going to be generated as usual. But the crucial thing is that each output is going to take into account only the inputs up to and including its current position. 

So the first decoder output will be based on only the first decoder input because there's only one attention weight there and the rest are set to zero. The second output will be based on the first and second inputs because there are two attention weights there. Same idea with the third output. And that applies all the way to the end with the final decoder output based on the entire sequence. So going back to our decoder here, the regular multihead selfattention will be replaced with a masked multihead selfattention. From there, you know everything else you need. A skip connection is added, followed by layer norm. Another multi head selfattention layer comes into play. But this time it's cross Attention where the keys and values are supplied by the Encoder outputs. So if you were wondering where the Encoder outputs come into play, it's here. Aside from the keys and values being different, the mechanism remains the same. That's followed by another skip and layer norm step. The result of that goes into a feed for a newer network, also applied pointwise and a final skip and layer normalization step to complete the decoder block. 

And like the Encoder, a stack of six decoder blocks are used to generate the output. The output from the last block goes into a linear layer in a soft max to generate a probability distribution over the target vocabulary, just like we've seen in the last couple of modules. And we can sample that probability distribution for the next word, or just pick the most probable one. And that's the original transformer, end to end. We now know how it works under the hood in detail, but to really solidify it, let's implement this in code. All right, so here we are in the NLP demystified transformers pre training and transfer learning notebook. As always, you can get to this through the course module page or the NLP Demystified GitHub repo. All right, so what we're going to do is build a transformer from scratch, layer by layer. We'll begin with the multi head selfattention layer, since that's the core mechanism. And then we'll create and compose other building blocks until we arrive at the transformer. We'll start by coding up the scaled product selfattention function. And as we saw in the slides, it's pretty straightforward. So given queries keys and values, the queries are multiplied by the transposed keys. The result of that is scaled by the root of the key dimension to get the Attention scores. All that is run through a soft max to get the Attention weights. And the Attention weights are multiplied by the values to get the output. And that's what's happening in this function here. So we're getting the key dimensions and calculating the Attention scores. The notable thing here is the mask. In the slides we talked about how the decoder is going to have a look ahead mask, which stops the decoder from attending to tokens ahead of its current time step. There'll be other masks as well, which we'll talk about, but this line here checks if there's a mask, and if there is, it takes the Attention scores and wherever the mask is set to zero, which means don't attend to whatever is in this position. The corresponding position in the scores is set to negative infinity. That way when we run the scaled scores through the softmax here, anything set to negative infinity will essentially have a weight of zero. And then finally we multiply the weights and values and return the result along with the weights themselves, which could be useful for analysis. Okay, so that's the scaled dot product self attention. Let's run through an example. Suppose we have queries keys and values. Each is a length of three. So a sequence of three embedings and the Embedding dimension is four. So I'm just populating these examples with random values. And here are the queries passing these queries keys and values to our selfattention function, we get the output, which is the same dimension as our values input, and we get our weights, which are three by three. Okay, so that's the selfattention function. Now we need to generate the queries keys and values themselves from our input. Here's one of the slides on Multi Head Attention in this example we have an input sequence of length three, where each item is an embedding of dimension twelve. This input is passed to three heads. Each head has its own set of query key and value weights of dimension three by four. In each head, the input is multiplied by the weights to create the queries keys and values and those are passed to the selfattention operation. So in this slide, each head is shown to have its own set of weights. This is how it's often portrayed in literature and tutorials because it's just easier to understand this way. And we can certainly code it up this way as well. But we can also code it up such that a single query weight matrix, a single keyweight matrix and a single value weight matrix can generate queries keysden values for all heads. We'll do it both ways. Okay, so down here we have a few initial settings. We're going to use the example from the slides. So our input is going to be a batch of one where the input is of length three and the embedding dimension is twelve. We'll have three heads. So the query key and value dimension in each head will be four because that's the embedding dimension divided by the number of heads. Let's generate some input first. Suppose this is our input. It's a batch of one sequence of length three, where each element is an embedding of dimension twelve. Yours will look different since I'm not setting any random seed. Here we'll have a separate set of query key and value weights for each head. So since we have three heads, that means we'll have three sets of query weights, three sets of key weights and three sets of value weights, each a dimension of three by four. So these are three sets of query weights. For example, one for each head, WQ zero, WQ one, WQ two. To generate our queries keys and values, we'll multiply our input by the weights. So here we're multiplying the input by the first head's weights to generate the queries keys and values for the first head and we're doing the same with the rest as well. And now we have the queries keys and values for each head. So for example, here are the queries keys and values for the first head q zero, k zero and V zero. And each is a batch of one with dimension three by four. Now we can take them and pass them to our self attention calculation. So here we're passing the queries keys and values for the first head to the function and we get the output and attention weights. Okay, so this is the output from the first attention head and we'll do the same with the other two heads as well. We're ignoring the return attention weights. Okay, so now we have the output from all three attention heads. As we covered in the slides. The last step is to concatenate the output from each head. So here's the concatenated output, and this would be run through a dense layer before being passed on to whatever's next, okay? So that's a complete run through multi head attention, with each head having its own set of weights. Now let's do the same thing, except this time with only a single query weight matrix, single keyweight matrix, and single value weight matrix. So these here were our separate query weight matrices, one for each head. Let's say instead of declaring separate query weight matrices, we had declared just one. We'll pretend we did that by concatenating the per head query weights into 1D by D query weight matrix. We're concatenating instead of declaring a fresh matrix to make sure we get the same results in the end, okay? And we'll do the same thing with the key and value weight matrices. So now we have a single query weight matrix, key weight matrix, and value weight matrix. Now we can dot the input with each set of weights to get the queries keys and values. So here are the resulting queries. As you can see, it's a batch of one with dimension three by twelve. We'll call these our combined queries. Now somehow we need to take our combined queries and separate them such that they look like our separate sets of queries from earlier. Notice that to get these separate queries, it's as if we need to vertically chop our combined queries. So the queries for the first head here correspond to the first four columns from the combined queries. And to get the second set of queries, we chop our combined queries here. To get per head queries, we don't need to actually break anything up. Instead, we can reshape and transpose or combine queries to get the same effect. First we'll reshape. We're going to take each twelve dimensional embedding and reshape them into four dimensional embeddings. So we've taken the first embedding and reshaped it into three four dimensional embeddings, and we've done the same with the other two. The end result is that we now have a sequence of three heads where each head is a three by four matrix. So now we have the right shape, but the numbers are in the wrong place. To get the right queries, it's as if we need to vertically chop the combined queries along every fourth dimension, right? So the first row from each matrix needs to be in its own head matrix. The second rows also need to be in their own head matrix, and the same for the third rows as well. This is where transposing comes in. We'll transpose our reshaped matrix by switching the positions of the second and third axis. And this gives us the setup we're looking for. You can learn more about how transpose works through this link here. If we compare the separate per head query matrices from before, we see that we now have the identical setup, except now all the queries are in a single matrix. And we can now do the same thing with our combined keys and combined values. So now all our queries keys and values for all heads are in three matrices rather than nine. And what this means is that all we need to do is make a single call to the selfattention function to get our output. So this is the output from the first head, second head and third head still in one matrix. For a quick visual inspection, here are the per head outputs from earlier when we had separate weights per head and we can see they match. The last step is to reverse our reshape and transpose operation. This time we'll transpose first, then reshape. This is the output that we would pass on to a dense layer. And we can see that it's identical to what we calculated earlier using separate sets of weights per head. Okay, great. So let's take everything we just did and encapsulate it in a multi head self attention class. And here it is. Nothing new here. The class takes the model dimension and number of heads as arguments. It instantiates query key and value weights. This is the dense layer we talked about to generate the final output. This split heads function does the reshape and transpose to get our queries keys and values in the right format. And this merge heads function just reverses it. This is where the action happens. Queries keys and values are generated. The output is calculated and returned along with the attention weights. And these Qkv parameters here may be a bit confusing, but these really mean the inputs from which to generate queries keys and values. So suppose we declared a multi head self attention layer with an embedding or model dimension of twelve and three heads. Passing our input to the layer, we get output of the same dimensions for further steps. Okay, so that's our multi head self attention layer, and that's probably the most tricky part of the transformer implementation. Everything else is going to look familiar if you've been following this course or know basic neural networks. All right, next we'll encode our encoder block. This is the encoder diagram from the slides. The input goes into the multihead selfattention layer, which we just coded up. There's a skip connection where we add the input to the attention output before putting it through a layer norm step that goes into a feed forward neural network before another skip and layer norm step. So let's do that. There are multiple feedforward neural networks in the transformer, all of which are two layer networks with the ReLU activation in the hidden layer. So we'll declare a function here that creates and returns one. Here's our encoder block. So we have our two chief layers here, the self attention layer and the feedforward neural network. One thing we didn't talk about in the slides is dropout the original transformer from the attention is all you need paper applied some dropout to the output of the selfattention and the feedforward layers. So we have two dropout layers here for that. By the way, the paper is linked in the reference section at the end of this notebook. And here we have our two layer norm layers. The call method takes the input, a Boolean training flag for the dropout and any applicable mask. The input goes through the multihead self attention layer. The output from that goes through dropout and then we add the output to the initial input. That's our skip connection and then we put that through layer norm. The output from that goes into the feedforward neural network, then dropout, and then another skip and layer norm step and we return the result of that along with the attention weights. Okay, so that is the encoder block. Let's declare one here with a model dimension of twelve three heads, and the feedforward neural network will have a dimension of 48, which is four times the model dimension. And we can pass our input to it to get output of the same dimension. Okay, so here's the output of a single encoder block. Now, before we go further, let's talk about the word and position embeddings. As we covered in the slides, we're going to tokenize our input using a subword tokenizer. Those tokens will be mapped to word embeddings and added to corresponding positional embeddings before being fed to the first encoder block. Let's start by loading a subword tokenizer for English. Bpemb is a byte pair encoding based subword tokenizer trained on Wikipedia and it supports hundreds of languages. Here we're loading the subword tokenizer for English. The tokenizer has a vocabulary size of 10,000 and each subword is represented by a 100 dimension vector. So for example, here's the embedding for the word car. We're going to use our own embedding layer. So we don't need the embeddings here. We just need Bpemb to turn our sentences into subword tokens and then vectorize those to integer sequences like we have many times already in this course. So, taking our sample sentence from the slides, where can I find a pizzeria? We can subwoot tokenize it using the encode method. In this case we get where can I find as whole words BPMB prepends underscores to signal those tokens, start a word and pizzeria is broken down into these subword tokens. As we covered in the slides, a subword tokenizer is going tokenize differently depending on the corpus it was trained on. To vectorize this sentence, we can call the encode IDs method. Okay, so each integer here corresponds to a subword token. We'll use our own embeddings. So we'll declare an embedding layer with a vocabulary size equal to the tokenizer vocabulary size. And with the embedding dimension we've used throughout the notebook, which is twelve, we can then pass our vectorized sentence to the embedding layer and get back a sequence of twelve dimensional embeddings. These embeddings can be trained concurrently with the model. Okay, so those are the word embeddings, which should look familiar at this point. Now we need to add positional information to each word embedding. Let's say our maximum sequence length is 256. In this case, we'll declare an embedding layer with 256 rows and the same number of columns as our word embedding layer. And we'll create a vector of position IDs for our input sequence. So in this case that's going from zero to nine, since the tokenized input is ten tokens long. From there, it's exactly the same as retrieving the word embeddings. We'll pass the vector of position IDs to the position embedding layer and retrieve position embeddings. Note how the dimensions match the dimensions of the word embedings ten by twelve. And since their dimensions match, it's a simple matter of summing the word embeddings and position embeddings. And this would be the input to the first encoder block. Now that we know how to create positional word embeddings, we can code up our encoder. It's pretty straightforward. The constructor takes a bunch of initialization parameters for the internal layers. We'll declare embedding layers for the words and positions. The attention is all you need. Paper apply dropout to the positional word embeddings before passing them to the first encoder block. So we have that here. And here. We're declaring a list of encoder blocks. Remember that the original transformer had six, but we can control that through the numb blocks parameter. All right, the call method takes a batch of vectorized input sequences and uses those to pull out word embeddings. This block of code here pulls out a positional embedding for every word embedding. And we'll go over this in a bit. The word and positional embeddings are added together and then run through dropout and then fed to the first encoder block. Each block's output is then fed to the next block until we return the last block's output and waits. Okay, so that's the encoder. Let's quickly go through what this block of code does. It generates position embeddings for a batch of input sequences. Let's say our input is a batch of three sequences. So each row here is a vectorized sentence. We need to create a positional ID for every integer in this batch. The first thing we'll do is create an array that's as long as the number of integers in the entire batch. Here we have a batch of three where each sequence is ten elements long. So there are 30 in total. The maximum input sequence length is ten. So within this array we'll have zero to nine, repeating until we hit 30 elements. We can then reshape this array so that it matches the dimensions of our batch of inputs, which is three by ten. And now we have a matching batch of position ID sequences. The last step is to simply pass this batch of position IDs to a position embedding layer to get the position embeddings. Okay? So we would add these position embeddings to the respective word embeddings and that would be our input. All right, let's give the Encoder a try. Here we have a batch of three sentences and when tokenized this is what they look like. The first thing we'll do is vectorize them into integer sequences. Notice that the sequences in this batch aren't the same length. The second one is shorter than the rest. And you may remember from the last couple of modules that when that's the case we need to pad the sequences such that everything is the same length. And we'll do that here using the pad sequences method. Now the whole batch is three by ten with the second sentence padded with an additional zero to make it the same length as others. Since we have some padding now, we should talk about masks. Wherever there's padding in our input, we don't want the selfattention mechanism to attend to those values. So we need a mask to stop that from happening. There are three masks involved in the transformer and we'll create all of them. There's the Encoder mask which stops the Encoder from attending to any padding values. There's the decoder mask used in the decoder's first self Attention layer. This is actually a combination of two masks the Padding mask to mask out any padding in the input target sequences and the Look Ahead mask we covered in the slides. Finally, there's the memory mask which is used in the decoder's second selfattention layer and that's used to mask out any Encoder keys and values positions which correspond to padding. In practice, the memory mask is often the same as the Encoder mask. This will all be clear in the code. Let's start with the Encoder mask. There's this line in the scaled product Attention function. If the function was passed a mask, then for any position set to zero in the mask, the corresponding position in the Attention scores will be set to negative infinity. So let's create a mask for the Encoder. Here we're creating a matrix the same dimension as our input sequences and setting any padding position to zero, everything else set to one. So these are our input sequences and this is the corresponding mask. Now keep in mind that these integer sequences are going to be turned into Embedding sequences which will then be split into three heads. That's going to generate an Attention score matrix with these dimensions. A batch of three, each with three heads, and inside each head a ten by ten matrix. The mask needs to work with that dimension. So what we need to do is expand the mask. Here we're inserting two new axes such that we get a four dimensional mask. And now each mask entry here is going to be broadcasted across its respective Attention matrix. And you can read more about broadcasting here. Now we can declare an Encoder. We'll declare one with six blocks, a model dimension of twelve, three heads and the feedforward neural network will have a hidden dimension of 48. And here's the Vocab size and the maximum input sequence length. And if we pass our input sequences to the Encoder along with the mask, we get the encoder's output. A batch of three, each a length of ten with each element, a twelve dimensional Embedding. Done. Now we can work on the decoder block. And everything we've done so far applies here. The major differences are that the decoder has an additional multi head cross attention layer where the keys and values come from the Encoder, and it also has an additional skip connection and layer norm step. All right, so here's the decoder block. It looks almost identical to the Encoder block, except for those additions we just mentioned. Here are our two self attention layers the feed forward network, three dropout layers and three layer norm layers. The Call method signature has more parameters. It takes the Encoder outputs as well as the input targets. And it also takes two masks. The Encoder mask used in the first self Attention layer and the memory mask used in the second selfattention layer. The input targets are passed to the first Attention layer. The output from that goes into dropout, then gets added to the input before going through layer norm. For the second selfattention layer, the output from the first Attention layer is the query source, while the Encoder outputs serve as the key and value sources. Dropout and layer norm again before going through the feed forward. And then the final dropout and skip and layer norm. That's the decoder block. The decoder is also similar to the Encoder, except again, it takes the Encoder outputs in the Call method and also two masks. But other than that, same idea. Get the input target embeddings, get the position embeddings, add them together, and then process them through all the decoder blocks until we get the output. Now, before we try the decoder, let's cover the decoder mask. As we mentioned, the decoder mask is actually a combination of two masks a Padding mask and the Look Ahead mask we covered in the slides. Let's say our input target is a batch of three. These values are just made up, by the way, just like our Encoder inputs. The first thing we'll do is pad everything out so that they're all the same length. Next, we'll create a Padding mask the exact same way we did for the Encoder. All right, now we need the Look Ahead mask. We can create that with a single line. We first create a matrix of ones with the same dimensions as the longest sequence length. So here that's eight by eight. And then we pass that to this band part method to keep everything in the lower triangle the same, and to set everything in the upper triangle to zero. So this way, the output at the first time step will attend to only the first input token. The output at the second time step will attend only to the first two inputs and so on. The last step is to combine these two masks, where we take the minimum element of each. And here's the result. So, for example, the first sequence is five elements long, so its mask is all zeros after the fifth column. The second sequence is of length eight, so no padding element here. The third sequence is also five tokens long, so its mask is the same as the first sequence. We can now declare our decoder and pass it our encoder, output, input, target sequences and two masks. And here's our decoder output. Now that we have all these pieces in place, the transformer itself is straightforward. It's an encoder, a decoder, and an output dense layer that expands the decoder output. To logits over the target vocabulary, the input sequences get passed to the Encoder. The output from that goes to the decoder along with the target sequences, and that output goes through the final linear layer. Here we're declaring a transformer and passing it our input and target input sequences. What we get back is a batch of three, each a length of eight, and each element is a 7000 dimension vector, since that is our target vocabulary size. That target size was made up, by the way. From here, if we're training, we can use the logits to calculate a loss. If we were doing inference, then we could run an argmax over each one to get the position with the highest logite value. Speaking of training, if you want to train this transformer, you can use the same method we used in this section of the Seek to seek notebook from the previous module. Okay, so that is the transformer from scratch. It's useful to know how these models work under the hood, but to train one to get state of the art results is pretty expensive in both compute and data. Fortunately, there's a whole zoo of pretrained transformer models that we can use, and we'll explore those now. All right, so that was a detailed look at how transformers work under the hood and how to implement one from scratch. When they came on the scene, transformers were a huge leap forward, not just for NLP, but for images and audio as well. But they have a couple of drawbacks. First, the attention mechanism is quadratic, which makes scaling challenging. And while there is no technical limit to how long inputs can be in practice, most transformer models limit input to the 512 to 1024 token range. And there are special transformer models which are designed to handle longer sequences. There's ongoing research to keep scaling transformers and deep learning models in general. This means that to train a transformer to get StateoftheART results is expensive in terms of data infrastructure, cost and engineering talent. And if you're like me and don't have access to these resources, then what do we do? This is where pre training. And transfer learning come in. The idea is to use a large pretrained transformer model that's been trained on some large scale language tasks. So this is a model that's been trained by a corporation or collective with deep pockets such as Google, OpenAI or HuggingFace on some large scale language task, and it's been made available to the public either as an open source model or behind an API. This model knows a lot about language, such as syntax, semantics, sentiment, and a bunch of other things that are relevant for any NLP related task you can think of. We take this pretrained model and then use it for our own tasks through a process called transfer learning. And this way we get to leverage a sophisticated model that we wouldn't have been able to train on our own for our own purposes to get incredible results. As an analogy, imagine a professional gymnast. Through years of training, this gymnast has developed a bunch of attributes and skills, such as a sense of balance, coordination, agility, mobility, great strength to weight ratio, and the psychology to get through hurdles. Now imagine this gymnast decides to learn martial arts. The core skills they developed as a gymnast are also useful for martial arts, so they're probably going to pick up the new skills pretty quickly compared to a person who's sedentary and physically untrained. And it's the same idea with leveraging large pretrained models. We get to leverage all the linguistic knowledge encoded in a large model and use that for whatever we want, whether it's classification, text generation, or speech recognition. When it comes to working with Transformers, taking a pretrained model and using it for our own end goal is the dominant approach today. We might need to adapt the model for our own purposes, but we'll rarely need to train one from scratch. What we're doing here is detaching the task of learning language from the task we're actually interested in. Up to this point, we've trained all our models from scratch, so not only did our models have to learn to classify, for example, but it had to simultaneously learn the language concepts in our corpora. With pretraining and transfer learning, we get to focus on our task. The Pretrained model itself can be reused for a bunch of other purposes. We already did some pretraining and transfer learning when we used the word vectors from Google. We took pretrained word vectors from Google and then used them in our own classification model. We'll do something similar here, but at a higher level. Let's cover a few of these Pretrained models. Once the original transformer was introduced, there was a Cambrian explosion of thousands of other pretrained transform models. A few of them are famous even outside AI circles such as birds and the GPD models. And it seems like every other week there's another major model that comes along and smashes benchmarks. Because things move so fast, we won't cover a particular model in detail but now that you know how transformers work, learning about individual ones shouldn't be too difficult. And by the way, transformers have been so successful that there are also pretrained models for visual, audio, and combinations of different input types. To get a handle on what's out there, we can organize the pretrained models into three categories. There are the Encoder only models, which is exactly what it sounds like. These are pretrained models where only the Encoder is used, and we'll go over how that works. They're mostly suited for predictive tasks such as labeling. There are the Encoder decoder models that we're already familiar with, and they're suited for sequence transformation tasks. And there are the decoder only models, which consist of only the decoder, and they're suitable for generative tasks. Now, it's not a hard line between the three categories when it comes to what they can do. So the Encoder models can technically be used for generative tasks, though it isn't a popular route. And the decoder models are actually capable of a lot more than what we think of as conventional generative work. We'll cover Bert and the GPT models in a bit more detail to get an idea of how Encoder and decoder only models work. And that'll set you up to learn about other models that you're interested in. 



## BERT


So, Bert stands for bi directional encoder representations from Transformers and was released by Devlin and colleagues at Google Brain. It's an encoder only model. So there's an Encoder with a number of Encoder blocks in it. So inputs go in, and it generates corresponding outputs. Now, just like the original transformer, the Burt Encoder uses multi head selfattention. And as we know, self attention is bi directional. So when generating the output, the Encoder can see future tokens. So, if this is an Encoder only model and the output is conditioned on all inputs, how's this model trained to learn anything? The original Burt model used two training tasks. One is masked language modeling. Suppose this is one of the input sequences. The show is canceled after one season. 



During training, the model's job is to predict a subset of the outputs. This is done by choosing 15% of the input tokens from the training corpus. Of that 15%, 80% is replaced with a special mask token. So, for example, let's say the second word, show, was picked. That word would be replaced with the special mask token. The model's job during training, then, is to use the left and right context to predict what the token is supposed to be. So the output would go through a softmax and output a probability distribution. Here, it's guessing words such as show, series, and podcast with different probabilities. This prediction would be compared against the real one using the techniques we used in earlier modules, and the Encoder weights would be adjusted. So the model is learning how to predict a missing word using its surrounding context words. Now, once this model is trained and we use it, we may want to adjust the weights further for our own tasks. In this case, our input won't have any mask tokens. So to teach the model to adjust non mask tokens, 10% of the chosen 15% of the tokens are replaced with another random token. So let's say in this case the word after is picked and it randomly gets replaced with the word pickle. The model's job is to then predict the correct token. Finally, the remaining 10% of the chosen tokens is kept as is. So let's say the word season is chosen, and in this case it remains unchanged. The model's job then is to predict the correct token, and as trading progresses, hopefully it realizes from the surrounding context that it's already the correct token. So that's mass language modeling, and that's one of the training tasks. The other task is next sentence prediction. And it's pretty simple. The task is given two sentences, determining whether the second logically follows the first. So here we have, he met his friends, they played katan, and yeah, given the first sentence, the second sentence makes sense. In contrast, let's say we have he met his friends, respect the neckbeard. Maybe in certain contexts that works, but overall it doesn't follow. And so the other task Bird is trained to do is judge whether one sentence follows another. The way it works is that two sentences are passed to the encoder, starting with a special CLS token. All inputs to Bird start with this token, and it's used for classification. As we'll see that's followed by the tokens for sentence A, then a special separator token, then sentence B, then another separator token. To that positional, embeddings are added, followed by segment embeddings, which just inform whether a token belongs to segment A or segment B. That input goes to the encoder, and the first CLS output is what we're interested in. Remember, the CLS output token is a blend of all inputs, so we can consider it a representation of the entire input. We want to know whether sentence B follows sentence A. So the CLS token is fed into a binary classifier which outputs a probability. From there, the loss is calculated and the encoder weights are adjusted. And this is done for a bunch of sentences. Okay, so the original Burt was trained using masked language modeling. And next sentence prediction in terms of stats, two Burt models were released, burt Base and Burt Large. And here are a few of their internal details. Both models have more blocks, more attention heads, and larger embedding dimensions than the original transformer. They were trained on the Books corpus data set consisting of 800 million words and English Wikipedia. So the Google Brain team took these corpora, trained these Burt models with the tasks we just described and then released these models to the world. We can download either Bert model and instantly have a pretrained model that knows a lot about language that we can use for our own tasks. What does it know? Consider this sentence she went to blank store. I'm guessing we all know what the word probably is. Bert wouldn't have any trouble filling in stuff like this, so it's aware of English syntax. The boy wandered the square. Blank looked lost. Filling in the blank with the word he signals awareness of co reference. I tried to enjoy the ballet, but I fell asleep in minutes. It was blank. Lots of options here, but filling it with something sensible signals awareness of sentiment. That's just a handful of examples. And so, just from learning how to fill in the blank using context, the model has picked up a lot about how language works. And we can use this for our own tasks without having to train a model from scratch. For example, we can use the Bert outputs directly. Bert's outputs are contextualized. For example, the output for the word pilot will be different depending on whether the input was fighter pilot or pilot episode, so the output carries some meaning. And we can use these directly in downstream models, such as clustering or a simple bag words model. We can use Bert for classification tasks of all kinds. Remember that the first input to Bert is a special CLS token, and there will be a corresponding output for that CLS token. This means we can run that CLS output through our own classifier, which can be anything we want, such as a neural network with a softmax output. In this case, our own classifier model is often called the head, while the pretrained model is the body. One thing to note is that we can either train only our own classifier and freeze Bert. In other words, don't allow Bert's weights to change, or we can allow the gradient to backpropagate through Bert as well. When we allow Bert's parameters to be adjusted to better suit our task. This process is called fine tuning. Bert can be used for labeling tasks of all kinds, such as named entity recognition, like we did when we covered RNNs. That would entail running a classification over all tokens. We can use Bert for extractive question answering. Extractive means pulling a span from a passage as an answer. So what we're looking for is a span of text and a passage that can serve as the answer to a question. In contrast, abstractive question answering means generating an answer from scratch based on a passage. In this case, Bert would be fed a question and a reference passage containing the answer. And its job would be to identify the token where the answer begins and the token where the answer ends. We'll see this in the demo. Finally, Bert can be used for extractive summarization, that is, identifying the key sentences in some passage and combining those as a summary. This involves passing sentences to Bert and having a binary classifier that decides whether a sentence should be included in the final summary. Okay, so those are a few ways we can use Bert in our own work, and we'll explore a few of them in the demo. The amazing thing is that there are thousands of fine tuned Bert models already available for all sorts of tasks and domains. For example, legalbird is a Bert model tuned on Law Corpora. For use in law related NLP applications. And we'll look at how to find and download these models in the demo. Since Bert came out, its descendants have built on top of the original team's work, and a bunch of others have been released. Here's a short list of them, and I've included a reference to each one in the references section there's. Roberta, the team behind it, figured that the original Bert was undertrained and that it could do much better given the same size. It used techniques such as dynamic masking. They concluded that next sentence prediction didn't add much value, so they dropped it and used larger segments instead. They also used larger batches and significantly larger training data. Size albert was an exercise in creating a lighter version of Bert. To that end, it uses a smaller initial embedding size, a technique called sentence order prediction and shared parameters. Distillbert uses a technique called knowledge distillation to achieve a similar performance to Bert while being 40% smaller and 60% faster. There's a link to the paper if you're interested. There was Electra, which achieved higher training efficiency, and XLM, which explored multilingual capacity. Okay, so lots of things have happened since Bert was released, and new things come along every day. Let's now talk about the generative pre trained transformer, or GPT, models from OpenAI. These are language models as we know and learned about in this course. That is, they were trained to predict the next token, just like our models were. The key difference is that it's done at a much larger scale and with sophisticated engineering tweaks to get a sense of the scale, GPT-3 was trained on 45 terabytes of data, amounting to hundreds of billions of tokens. It has 175,000,000,000 parameters and 96 decoder blocks, each with 96 attention heads. The model itself is around 800gb in size. It has a batch size of 3.2 million and at the time, an unprecedented contact size of 2048. Although this isn't confirmed, this model probably took days and millions of dollars to train. And as of today, it's not even the largest model in existence. The fascinating thing is that just by learning to predict the next token at scale, it leads to all sorts of capabilities. The obvious one is generative writing. There are now dozens of companies out there offering tools to help us write everything from market and copy to fiction. The quality of the output varies depending on the task complexity, the initial prompt, and how the company tweaks the input and output. But at the very least, it can help a human with idea generation and overcoming writer's block. It's just going to keep getting better from here. But there are a bunch of other things GPT-3 can do. GPT-3 is not open source. Rather, it's available behind an API, but you can sign up for an account@openai.com and get a few credits to use. They have a playground you can experiment with. Here's something from the playground session I used. Everything highlighted in green is text generated by GPT-3, and here I prompted GPT-3 with write a five step procedure to follow if your spaceship stalls halfway to the moon and GPT-3 responds with exactly that, there's a short introduction followed by five numbered steps to take. And it starts with do not panic. So there's a sense that this is a severe, intense situation. Next, check all of your ship's systems to see if there's a problem. If you cannot find the problem, contact Mission Control. Follow mission control's instructions. Use emergency procedures to return to Earth. So GBT Three picked up the idea that it's a five step procedure that we want, that if we're in this situation, it's probably some kind of mission, with mission control observing we're probably coming from Earth and so on. It's pretty remarkable. On the flip side, these steps don't say anything at all. It's completely generic and unhelpful, and we'll see that sometimes with GPT-3 output. It's like a clever high school kid who refuses to say I don't know and will just come up with anything that sounds plausible. GBT Three can also generate code. Here I prompt with a code comment. Python Three snippet calling the Pexels.com API to retrieve images and mountains. Pexels.com, by the way, is a stock image site, and GPT-3 responds with code and uses the requests library to pull a few hundred images from the site. If you know of or use GitHub Copilot. It's a Microsoft product that does something similar to this, but it's fine tuned for the task. Microsoft has an exclusive license with OpenAI for access to the actual GBT Three model, not just the API. Here I pass an observation and ask GBT Three a question. Sarah went to the show but spent the whole time on her phone. Did she like the movie? And it comes back with a certain interpretation, amounting to saying that it's difficult to tell the answer, uses complete sentences and includes reasons for its conclusions. GPT-3 can also follow commands. Here I ask GPT-3 to repeat after me, and it does just that. So while it is continuing my prompt, it has a clear idea of the context for the generation. GPT-3 can also translate. Here I ask it to translate a sentence into two languages and it responds with just that in a structured format. One thing to note here chances are GBT Three didn't come across this exact scenario during training, but it was still able to fulfill the request. This is an example of zero shot learning, where a model, despite not having seen the input during training can still come up with the correct or expected output. Sometimes zero shot fails. So here I type the word puppy with an arrow, and GBT interprets the prompt as some kind of code that I want continued, which isn't the case. And I can't blame it because most people would have no idea what I want. So I give it an example. I type kitten, arrow, cat, then puppy, arrow, blank, and this time GBT recognizes it as an analogy exercise and responds correctly. It then continues by outputting the analogies in reverse. For some reason, in this case, I just had to provide GPT one example to understand what I wanted. This is called one shot learning. I then extended the prompt by asking GPT to output only a one word response, and it responded with dog. Very cool. One more example. Here I just wrote one arrow and GPT just guessed gibberish. So I gave it one example. One arrow, two, three arrow blank. Most humans would probably continue this correctly, but GPT didn't quite get it. This time it was closer in terms of output, but it just outputted identical pairs. So I give it a few more examples. 123-4567 blank, and it gets closer. It outputs pairs of increasing digits, but it includes a blank second digit as part of its pattern, and a digit is skipped every few pairs. So I give it one more prompt. But this time I asked GPT to start from a new line, and this time it got it perfectly and continue the pattern. In this case, I had to give GPT a few examples before things clicked. And this is a case of few shot learning. Okay, so that's Bert and GPT at a high level. Let's look at where and how we can use these models. All right, so we are back in the NLP demystify Transformers and Pretraining notebook. You can get to this notebook through the module page or the NLP demystified GitHub repo. And as we've done for the past several modules, please ensure you have GPU acceleration enabled by going to runtime, change, runtime, type, and selecting GPU. Okay? So in this notebook, we're going to use tools from HuggingFace to get up and running quickly and to also fine tune pre trained models. After that, we'll explore GPT a bit more. If you don't know HuggingFace, it's a company that makes machine learning accessible to everyone, and they do a lot of things in service to that. On their hubs. They host thousands of models and datasets that you can use and where you can share your model with others. They provide libraries that make it easy to download and process data sets and load and train and use models. They have an active community tutorials, a place to host apps, and a bunch of paid solutions as well. Very cool company. And what they've done with their open source work has been a game changer, as we'll see now, we'll use their Transformers library, which makes it easy to download and use pretrained models. To do that, we need to install transformers. We also need to install the hugging face datasets library for use later on. I've already done that, so if you need to do so, please pause the video and go ahead. All right, the Transformers library has a module called pipeline that provides an end to end system for us out of the box for a bunch of tasks. So here we're loading a pipeline for text classification, and we can now feed text to this pipeline and have it classify for us. So behind the scenes, the pipeline downloads a classification model with the right tokenizer, and it will handle tokenization, vectorization, inference, and all of that for us. So here we're just feeding the pipeline some text to be classified. Alice was excited to guard the island, but it didn't live up to the hype. And what we get back is a negative sentiment. Same idea here. Bob doesn't do well in group situations, but he said it wasn't bad. Feed in the line, and we get back a positive sentiment. So, you know, in the previous modules, we were writing all this logic to pre process text vectorize. It train a model, write an inference function and all that. And here we get an excellent text classification system with a couple of lines of code. Now, two things here, there's a warning message saying no model was supplied. We didn't specify a particular model to use. So the Transformers library used whatever set as the default. In this case, a DistilBERT model that's been fine tuned on a data set called the Stanford sentiment tree bank. This is okay for prototyping, but in production, we'll want to specify exactly which model to use to avoid surprises. We'll see how to do that in a bit. The second thing is that this classifier is doing binary sentiment classification. If we want to do another kind of classification, maybe with more classes, we'll need to either find a model that's been fine tuned for that on the hugging face model hub, or fine tune a pretrained model on our own. We're going to learn how to fine tune a pretrained model in the next section. Let's check out other pipelines. Here, we're instantiating one for a summarization. I'm going to fast forward through these downloading parts. Okay, so here pipeline downloaded the distill bart seek to seek model along with its tokenizer. Here we have a block of news text about a chess dispute where one player is suing another. And if we run it through the summarizer, this will take a few seconds, we get a decent result. We find out who's doing what, why, and other people involved. And note that this isn't extractive. So this summary isn't a subset of the sentences from text. Distillbart has a decoder, so it generated this summary in its own words, so to speak. There's even a pipeline for question answering. This pipeline does extractive question answering, which means that given a passage or a context and a question, the pipeline searches for a span of text in the context that answers the question. So here's a context block talking about Hugging Face, and the question is who are the Hugging Face founders? And the right span is pulled from the context. We get their names and it's pulled from this part of the context. Now, the obvious weakness here is that if the answer isn't in the context, the question can't be answered. Even if you ask the model to come up with a reasonable guess, it can't do that. It also struggles with more complex sequences. So here we're asking what does Hugging Face do? And in the context it talks about what the company originally did, which was developed a chatbot and then how it pivoted to becoming a platform. So the pipeline should tell us what the company does today after pivoting, but instead it tells us what it did before. Handling these kinds of situations is one of the many challenges in question answering. Okay, so that's the Transformers pipeline, and as you can see, you can get a very good model doing cool things within minutes. But wait, there's more. Check out this link here for a list of other pipelines. There are pipelines not just for NLP, but also audio and image processing as well. This is the Hugging Face model hub, where there are thousands of models available, some of them from Hugging Face, some from other companies, and a lot from individuals who are sharing their work. Some of them are pretrained models only, which means we need to fine tune them for a task. And some of them are already fine tuned for something. So for example, we can filter for the text classification models. And the top one is a pretrained Roberta based model that's been fine tuned on Twitter data for sentiment analysis. If we click on it, we see the model card that explains how the model was fine tuned, how to use it, and on the right side here, you can even try out the model. So whenever you set out to do some NLP work and need a model, you can check out the model hub to see whether there's something already available. And if you decide to fine tune your own model, you can then upload it to the hub for others to use. Alright, let's say we want to do some named entity recognition and we want to use a particular model. In this case, the Burt based model that was fine tuned for Ner by David Lim. All we need to do is pass the model name to the pipeline and it'll download the model along with the right tokenizer. And just like before, pass the pipeline some text and we get an object with entity tags. So here Redmond was broken into two subwords, which is fine but it was tagged incorrectly as a person. Microsoft and OpenAI, however, were tagged correctly as organizations. So we mentioned before that HuggingFace offers a lot of things. In addition to the model hub, there's a hub for datasets which we'll be using shortly. And Spaces is a place where you can host your model. I encourage you to check out their docs, their free course and the excellent book. All right, let's say you looked on the hub and there isn't a fine tuned model that suits your purpose because maybe you have a specific domain. In this section we're going to learn how to fine tune a pretrained model specifically for question answering. But you can use the same workflow to fine tune a model for other tasks. Because we're just learning how to fine tune and the colab free tier is fairly constrained. We're going to use a famous data set called Squad, which is the Stanford question answering data set. It consists of crowdsourced questions from a set of Wikipedia passages and where the answer is a span in the passage. We can download Squad from the hugging face datasets hub. There are more question answering datasets there. Some of them are very challenging. We'll use the Load dataset function from the datasets library to Load Squad. One of the nice things about this function is that it automatically splits the data into train validation splits. The object we get back is a dataset DICT object which wraps an Apache arrow table which is an inmemory column format for fast analytics. As we can see, the DICT contains two objects a train data set object and a validation data set object. These are the features in the data set and these are the numbers of examples. More on those in a bit. Let's take a look at the data here. We're looking at the first three and another three consecutive entries and a few of their features. If we expand this, we see that each example has a Wikipedia passage, a question about the passage, and an answer. The answer consists of the span of text and at which character position the answer starts. In this case, 515. Note how the same Wikipedia passage is used multiple times so that's what the raw data looks like. All right, so here's what we need to do. We need to choose a pretrained model, download the tokenizer for that model tokenize and vectorize our data set mark where each answer starts and ends in our data set. Download the pretrained model we chose, then fine tune that pretrained model with our data set. The free tier of colab is fairly constrained, so we use a pretrained model called Distill Roberta Base. You may recall from the slides that Roberta is a descendant of Bert. That's more powerful. Like Bert, it's an encoder only model and it comes in a smaller base version and a large version. We're using the Base version here. Distill. Roberta Base is a distilled. Version of Roberta base. It was created the same way Distill Bert was created using a technique called knowledge distillation, which you can read more about. The end result is a smaller, faster version of Roberta Base that performs almost just as well. So this is a model that's already been pre trained on a large corpus and has a lot of linguistic information, and we are going to further fine tune it for question answering. Okay, so we've chosen our pretrained model. That's step one. Step two is to download the right tokenizer. The Transformers Library has an Auto tokenizer class that automatically retrieves the right tokenizer given a model name. So here we're downloading the tokenizer for Distilled Roberta base. It's that simple. Step two done. Let's try out the tokenizer using the Encode method that tokenizes the string and returns a sequence of token IDs. If we want to tokenize properly, however, we need to call the tokenizer as if it's a method. And what we get back is a batch encoding object that contains the input IDs we just saw and an attention mask. In this case, since there's no padding, it's all ones. Note the zero and the two here which were added by the tokenizer to convert the input IDs back to tokens. We can use the convert IDs to tokens method. So, multiple things to note here. There's a start of sentence token at the beginning, which corresponds to zero. There is an end of sentence token corresponding to two. Padding is one. By the way, pizzeria was broken into two subwords. And any subword that's the beginning of a word has this special accented g in front of it to denote space. And this is specific to the Roberta based tokenizer. If we were to use another tokenizer, we might see something different. Okay, so that's how to use the tokenizer. Recall from the slides that in question answering. With an Encoder only model, we supply both the question and context to the model as input. So when we're training this model, we'll supply the question and context as input, compare its answer to the true answer, and adjust its parameters from there to tokenize the question and context. Together, we can pass both to the tokenizer separated by a comma. Now, if we convert the input ID sequence back to tokens, we see double end of sentence tokens between the question and context. That's what Roberta Base uses as a separator. Again, other tokenizers may use a distinct separator token. Just a side note, most of the tokenizers from the Transformers Library comes in two implementations a Python implementation and a faster Rust implementation. The Auto tokenizer class will download the faster implementation when available. To check whether we have the rust tokenizer, we can check whether it's an instance of pretrained tokenizer fast. In this case, it is. Let's say we want to tokenize this question. Context bear Sarah went to the Mirthless Cafe last night to meet her friend where did Sarah go? So just like our data set, we also have the answer span and the character position where the answer starts. As we now know, to tokenize, we need to pass the question and context together to the tokenizer. Let's decode the result. For legibility, we're using the batch decode method. Note how the word mirthless was broken into three subwords m, Earth and less. All right. In practice, models have some sequence length limit. In the case of Roberta base, that's 512. We may not even be able to use the full sequence length because of memory limits. But even if we could, the question and context together may be longer than that. For example, let's say that the maximum sequence length we can handle is 15. In that case, we need to truncate the context. And we're doing that here by setting truncation to only second. If we decode the result, we see that the answer, the mirthless cafe starts in the context but gets chopped off. So the full answer is not in this context. But the model needs to learn to find the answer if there is one. And to do that, it needs to get exposed to it. So what do we do to ensure we make all the context tokens available within the maximum sequence length? We'll set return overflowing tokens to True and also set the padding to max length. And the result is multiple sequences. We now have three sequences of input IDs. If we batch decode the results, we see the entire context is now captured across three sequences. So the first sequence contains Sarah went to the mirth. The context then continues in the second sequence. Let's cafe last night to meet until the whole context is captured. Note the padding on the last sequence because it's shorter than the maximum length, and that's also reflected in the last attention mask. There's also something new here. This overflow to sample mapping. So this one sample resulted in three sequences. So this mapping just tells us which sample each sequence came from. In this case, they all came from the first and only sample. So it's three zeros. Let's say we tokenized a pair of questions and contexts. This results in two sequences. Each one fits within the maximum allowable length. And the overflow to sample mapping is saying the first sequence comes from the first sample and the second sequence comes from the second sample. Now, there's still a problem here. We have all the context tokens, but the full answer is not in any of them. Right now, the answer is split between the first and second sequence. To solve this, we can use stride to create overlapping sequences. We did something similar when we created our character based language model. Here we're setting stride to five, which means that each tokenized context sequence should start five tokens back from where the previous sequence ended. To make that clearer, we'll decode the batch and we can see that the second sequence now starts five tokens back from where the previous sequence ended. So Sarah went to the Mirth, went to the Mirthless, same with the third, and so on. The result is that the third and fourth sequences now contain the full answer. Of course, in your own work, what you choose as a stride value will be based on your data and the expected input. Great. So now we have a way to tokenize and vectorize. Our question context bears that's. Step three done. Step four is to mark where each answer span starts and ends in our vectorized data set. This is the object our tokenizer returned. It has these three keys input IDs, attention mask and overflow to sample mapping for question answering. Our Distill Roberta base model will expect two more pieces of information for every sequence the token position where the answer starts and the token position where the answer ends. Right now, the only data we have is the character position of where the answer starts in the context. Somehow we need to use the information we have to find the token position of where the answer starts and ends in our input ID sequences. To do that, the tokenizer offers a return offsets mapping flag which we'll set to true. The result is that we get this additional offset mapping entry in the result, it's a collection of sequences. There is an offset mapping sequence for every input ID sequence. Every entry in an offset mapping tells us the character position, start and end of each token in the original string. So here's the first input ID sequence along with its companion offset mapping sequence. Zero. Zero means it's a special token. So we have at the beginning two of them in the middle for the separator and another at the end. This zero five here is saying that this token 13841 starts at character position zero and ends at character position five. This token two two starts at character position six and ends at character position nine. Let's look at this first nonspecial input ID and its corresponding nonspecial offset mapping. Converting the token ID to a word, we get the word where. Using the offset mapping to extract the word from the question, we get the same result. So since we know the character position of where the answer starts and where it ends and we now have offset mappings, we can now determine the token positions of where the answer starts and ends. Before we do that, here are the first two offset mapping sequences. Note a couple of things. In the first sequence, the question part starts from zero, which makes sense. The context part, after the two separator tokens also starts from zero. On the next sequence, the question part again starts from zero. Fine. But the context part carries on from the previous sequence after accounting for stride. So we need to tell which offsets belong to a question and which belong to a context and whether an offset mapping sequence contains the answer at all. Because as we saw, not all sequences contain the answer. So two things we need to know which offset mappings belong to a context and whether a particular sequence contains the full answer at all. To help us solve the first problem, we can use the sequence IDs method on the batch encoding object. So here we're asking for the sequence IDs for the first input ID sequence and we get back this list. None corresponds to special tokens including padding, zeros correspond to question tokens and ones correspond to the context tokens. So to identify where the context tokens start, we can find the position where the ones start in this list. Now let's solve the second problem, which is determining whether a sequence contains the full answer. We know the character position where the answer starts. To get the ending character position, we can add the length to the start position. So the answer starts at 14, the answer ends at 32, and if we use that to pull a span from the context, we get the answer. All right, we now have all the information we need to add token start positions and token end positions for the answers. Looking at the tokenized sequences, we know the full answer is not in the first sequence, but is in the third sequence. Let's use those as examples. The first thing we'll do is get the input IDs, offset mappings and sequence IDs for the first sequence. So these are the sequence IDs for the first sequence. We need to determine the position of the first one and the last one. That's how we'll know where the context tokens start and end. Finding the position of the first one is simple. We'll use Python's index method to find the position of the last one. We'll use this utility function here. And now we know where the context tokens begin and end in the first sequence. We can use those positions to extract the offset mappings corresponding to the context tokens. And there they are. Because this is the first sequence, we're looking at the context offsets begin at zero. Before we look for the answer start and end positions, we can check whether the full answer is available at all. We know the starting character position of the answer, so we can just check whether the lowest offset mapping value. So the first entry of the first offset mapping is lower or equal to the starting character position. In this case, the character start position is 14 and the lowest offset value is zero. So the answer does begin in the sequence. Then we do the same thing. On the other end is the highest offset mapping value. So the second entry of the last offset mapping higher than or equal to the ending character position. In this case, the position is 32 and the highest offset value is 23. So the answer does not end in this sequence. So this means the full answer is not in this sequence, and we can skip scanning for it. And we can do a quick sanity check by inspecting the sequence tokens. The answer begins here, but then gets truncated. All right, good. Now let's do the exact same thing with the third sequence. This is the identical code, except it's operating on the third sequence. In this case, the full answer is in the sequence. The starting character and end character positions are within the lowest and highest offset mapping values, respectively. So now we can scan for the starting and ending token positions. Scanning is pretty straightforward. We'll start by scanning from the left to find the start. We'll keep moving token by token to the right until the lower offset mapping value is no longer lower than the answer start. From there, if the lower offset mapping value matches the starting character position, we'll take that token position as the start. Now, because different tokenizers behave differently, it's not guaranteed that the lower offset mapping value has the same value as the character answer start. So the start answer character position is 14, but maybe the lower offset value here is 15. In those cases, we need to step back by one position to make sure we have the beginning of the answer. And down here, it's the same idea to find the ending token position, except we're scanning right to left. And after scanning, we have the starting and ending token positions of the answer span, in this case, nine and 13. If we extract the tokens within that position and decode it, we get the answer. Okay, so we're going to do this with every sequence in our vectorized squad data set using this method here, it contains everything we just did. At the top, we're stripping left spaces because some tokenizers, like Roberta's, doesn't do that. So if a question happens to have a lot of space, the context may not get vectorized at all. Here we're tokenizing. This will be our collection of starting and ending positions. From there, we'll step through every sequence, extract the data we want from a sequence and determine the character end position, do the scan and add the result to our positions. If the answer is not in the sequence, if this check fails, in other words, then we just add zero as our starting and ending positions for that sequence. Great. One last thing before we prep the data set. Here's the max length, stride and batch size we're using. I arrived at these numbers through experimenting. What the free tier of colab can handle. Larger numbers in batch size or sequence length results in out of memory errors. If you have access to colab pro with more GPU memory, or you're training locally on a decent card, you can increase these numbers. But this works just fine for our purposes. The HuggingFace dataset DICT object offers this map method to which we can pass our prepared data set method here. We're saying we want our data processed in batches. We want the original data set columns removed, and we want it to use multiprocessing, in this case, two processes to split the work. You can increase this. So we'll kick that off, and I'll fast forward through this. Okay, it's done. By the way, if you see red progress bars here, that's a reporting bug in the library at the time of this recording. Okay, so our data is now vectorized and contains the answer start and end token positions when available. Just a few cleanup steps remain. The model expects a certain set of named parameters in our data set. Two of them which are not needed are offset mapping and overflow to sample mapping. So we'll remove those. And finally, we're going to use the TensorFlow implementation of the pretrained model. So the last step is to convert the data set objects into TensorFlow compatible data structures. And we can do that simply by calling the two TF dataset method and passing in our batch size. Okay, great. So that's step four. Done. Step five is to download the pretrained model we want. Like the tokenizer, we'll use an auto class to retrieve the right model. Specifically, we'll use the TF Auto model for question answering class. The TF stands for TensorFlow, and question answering here means the model is going to come with a head for question answering. Recall from the slides that when fine tuning, the pretrained model is called the body, and the task specific model we attach to the body is called the head. So the transformers library is going to attach a head that's suited for question answering. Now that the pretrained model we want is downloaded, there's this message here. Some layers of TF Roberta for question answering were not initialized from the model checkpoint at Distill Roberta base and are newly initialized QA outputs. QA outputs is a dense layer to determine the likelihood of a token being the start and end token of an answer span. And this message is saying that this layer wasn't initialized from the checkpoint. In other words, it hasn't been trained. It goes on to say, you should probably train this model on a downstream task to be able to use it for predictions and inference. And that's exactly what we're going to do. We're going to fine tune this Distill Roberta base model for question answering. This is a method which, given a tokenizer model, question and context, returns the best answer it can find. So it tokenizes the question and context runs it through the model. The model output contains a startlodgets and end logits collection. Start logits contain a score for each token, denoting how likely it's to start token, and it's the same idea for the N logits. So we'll take the position with the highest value from both and use those positions to extract an answer span from the input IDs decode. It and return the result as an answer. So here's our original context in question. Since our model hasn't been fine tuned, this is going to perform poorly. We don't get the answer we're expecting. Let's train it to do better. Here we're initializing an optimizer using a learning rate recommended by the Burt authors. This mixed precision policy here directs Keras to use a mix of 16 and 32 bit floating point values for faster performance and less memory usage. And now we can call model Fit, which is going to train both the head and adjust the body weights to better perform the task. The cool thing with fine tuning is that we don't have to use as many epochs as we would if we were training a model from scratch. Two to four is typically enough. Here, we're using just one to demonstrate how far a single run can get. Now, if you're on the free tier of colab like me, the training time is going to be all over the place, anywhere from 20 minutes to an hour, depending on which GPU colab assigned to you. I'll fast forward through this and see you on the other side. Okay, our model is now fine tuned. Let's see how well it works. So the first question is, where did Sarah go? And we get the right span. Second question, who did Sarah meet? That's good too. When did Sarah meet her friend? And who went to the restaurant? This is technically ambiguous because her friend is also an answer, but this works too. Okay, so our question answering model is now working pretty cool, at least for these scenarios. As we saw earlier, extractive question answering has its limits. This logic teaser question doesn't work. Granted, there's ambiguity here, but given the context, Sarah could be a right answer. The model can't determine when a question can't be answered. So here we're asking, how did Sarah get to the restaurant? The question can't be answered, but the model returns a span. There are question answering data sets, such as Squad Two, which explicitly train for this scenario. And if we ask the model to come up with a possible reason why they met, it can't. It's not generative at all. But despite these shortcomings, I hope this section has shown you the power of taking a pretrained model and using it for your own goals. We're just scratching the surface of question answering systems here. For example, in practice, we wouldn't expect the user to supply the context, but rather have the right context pulled from a database somewhere. There's also question answering that operates on graphs and tables and other nontext data, and also abstractive question answering, where the model generates answers in its own words, in some cases with no access to a database, which means it has to rely entirely on what it learned during training. Speaking of which, we'll now switch over to the OpenAI playground and try out these prompts here to see how GPT responds. Okay, so here we are in the OpenAI playground. If you don't have an account with OpenAI, open one, and you should get a few credits to play with it's. More than enough for the examples here. Along with the terminal, there are a bunch of options on the right hand side. So this model dropdown lists the different sizes of GBT Three available, with DA Vinci being the most powerful and most expensive. There's temperature, which we covered in our first language model, a max length setting, and a bunch of other sampling options you can learn about. We'll stick with the defaults here. So our first prompt is he said hello, she said bonjour, he said goodbye, she said and then it ends. If we submit this with control enter, GPT picks up the pattern and completes the sentence. All right, so next one. My name is Kilgore. I run a revenge for hire business called Delightful Reprisals. I billed my customer the wrong amount, write an apology email to the customer and sign it with my name and company. Include a reason blaming Elon Musk. If we submit this, we get, hello, I am sorry for billing you the wrong amount. I blame Elon Musk for distracting me with those tweets. Sincerely, Kilgore. Delightful reprisals. So, GPT-3 understands our intent, how to structure a basic letter, and even knows something about Elon Musk in the popular press. The coolest thing about large language models to me is that they're like agents. They can follow commands, understand the context of the command, and then bring their own knowledge to the task. It's not guaranteed that their knowledge is correct, but there are ways to deal with that. And if they're generating words as agents here, then why can't they generate other stuff, like instructions for robots to carry out, or even mathematical proofs? GPT-3 can also understand word problems. So here we have he brought three pies to the office. He gave one to his coworkers and threw one at his boss's face. How many pies did he have left? Okay, and we get one, the numeral one. In some cases, you might get a complete sentence. Very cool that GBT Three can process this. Here's another example of GBT understanding context and being able to pull up general information answer in the style of Jeopardy. He was the 26th President of the United States. Who was? Theodore Roosevelt. So it understands what Jeopardy is, how answers should be structured, and also has common historical information stored in its parameters. Okay, so we spent time fine tuning and encoder only models to answer questions, and we got it working here. We're supplying GBT with the same context and asking it to answer the same set of questions, with each answer having to be on a separate line. So without any fine tuning, GBT had no problems generating answers given this prompt. And unlike our encoder model, GBT could answer questions for which there isn't an answer in the context. So for these last two questions, how did Sarah get to the restaurant? And what's a possible reason why they met? GBT has an awareness of everyday life patterns from just consuming a lot of text and predicting the next token. Okay, next prompt. What did Mary Antoinette say about avocado toast? Mary Antoinette did not say anything about avocado toast, which is great. This is an amusing sample, but this is where we need to be careful about just taking GPT's output without fact checking, because sometimes the model might say that she said, let them eat avocado toast. Here's something that GBT struggles with. What's a word that rhymes with money? Okay, so that was pretty easy, but what about what's a word that rhymes with kafka esque? Bizarre. So not so easy. I'm guessing it's related to the subword tokenization. It's a similar thing here. Write a haiku about the terminator. Alright, so we get Skynet will rise, John Connor must die, Terminator will kill. So this is actually pretty good because we can tell GBT understands the spirit of a haiku. The structure loosely conforms to one. It's just missing the right syllable count. But again, the way it fits the structure with ideas from The Terminator franchise is awesome. To make it even more difficult, we can try write a limerick about The Terminator. Okay, so we have there once was a movie called The Terminator that starred Arnold Schwarzenegger. It was about a machine that was sent back in time to kill Sarah Connor. Okay, it's the same here. GBT struggles a bit with rhyming, but the spirit of the limerick is there. And there's an attempt at a narrative throughout the limerick. So, again, GBT is more than a language model, as we thought about them in previous modules. At scale, it starts acting more like an agent. You can tell it what to do, give it some context, and it can fill in blanks with its own knowledge. What if the model were trained on even more data and could do more than generate text? So other media like audio and video, and we could hook up databases to it. At that point, I think we'd get agents intelligent enough to help us in anything, whether it's our job, our personal lives, or our creative pursuits. There's a lot to think about and explore. On the OpenAI page, there's a page of examples you can play with and modify. Check it out. Obviously, this model isn't just here for our amusement. We can build apps on top of it. GBT is available behind an API. And to get started, you can check out the documentation here, which, among other things, shows you how to fine tune the model for your own purposes. All right, so that was a bit more exploration into GPT's capabilities. If you're interested in alternatives, there are a number of open source decoder models available on hugging face, including GPT-2. You can try them directly on the model page and compare the output against GPT-3 at the time of this recording. GPT four isn't out yet, but keep an eye out for it. With the way things are going, I wouldn't be surprised if it ends up being another huge leap forward and down. Here are a few more links for you to explore. All right, so that was a deep dive into how transformers work and how we can use pretrained models for our own work. At this point, transformers are a few years old, and eventually some other architecture will come along that'll be even more impactful and eclipse it. But in a field that's introducing something new now every week. It's remarkable how this architecture has stood the test of time and remains the basis of so many state of the art models today. As Andre Karpathi tweeted, the transformer is a general purpose, differentiable computer with a lot going for it, and now we have a solid grounding in the fundamentals. It's an exciting time, and I hope you take this knowledge and go on to build and ship amazing things."
